% August 22, 2026 version
\section{Introduction}


\textit{One must imagine Sisyphus happy. A pale blue dot. You make your own meaning.} We know these sentiments well, implicitly, explicitly and everywhere in between. When Nietzsche first said god is dead and we have killed him \cite{nietzsche1974gay}, he foreshadowed the very world we wake up in in 2026. Genocides on the rise, democratic backsliding accelerating, and an ethos of existential fragility underlying every new failure of morality that populates world news. In a word, the foundation is breached, and we are locked into a dance to either breach it further or be consumed by the same dragon of ignorance which bound our ancestors. It is best to get the dragon out of the way to start, because the reason the modern crisis is so acute is because we know by the scars we wear that the dragon is a fate worse than death. 


\subsection{The Premodern Dragon}


I want to take you back to the year 400 CE, during the brutal, slow death of Rome. With society crumbling, human despair was growing stronger, and needed something, anything to make it make sense. What it came to rely on was a dormant sensation roiling at the heart of human sentience, rendered into a blind whisper: \textit{fear}. Think of primitive man witnessing a lightning bolt shear out a tree, or the sight of the moon washing over the face of the sun during a total solar eclipse. Think of the terror you would have felt in watching yourself hopelessly subjected to the power and the wrath of nature, choking and sputtering under your own ignorance; your fate woven into a greater story you never even knew by name. This is the burden handed to us through the eternal passage of evolutionary time, where in a blink millions of years go by in which our ancestors lived as prey animals against the unholy Mesozoic creatures walking the night. Even when the creatures were gone, still we carried in our mammal brain the memory of that eternal torture, letting it slip into the tales we tell after dark and the warnings of demons like Sisyphus who vanished into the abyss of agony. We feel these stories so strongly not because any of us felt that kind of pain personally, but because the twitching deep in our psyche is always waiting for that next moment when the unholy creatures return. Every babe told to dig themselves out of the pit to hell by salvation feels this lingering fear. Every man or woman who shutters at the thought of being silenced and alone. The Dark Era left a mark on us all, and we know that it is illogical to think the Mesozoic will ever return, and yet still, somehow, we keep waiting. We waited every night during those days, so why can't the last seventy million years be but a longer intermission? 


The dragon itself, which we'll refer to as \textit{the premodern dragon}, hatched from the pulp of its egg when this root fear of the darkness met with the human impulse for control and dominance over others. What this concoction created was something as ravenous as it was unstoppable---the preying on human fear to align others like a puppet within the domain of control. Think of the disturbing images and themes propagating during the fall of Rome, and shown even to children. \textit{Christ bleeding on the cross. Hellfire claiming the souls of our fellow man. Living humans rendered to mere animals in the eyes of the pious.} I want to bring your attention to the embodiment of this era's self-loathing and desperation, which can be found in the writings of Saint Augustine, who says human beings are so foul that we should be glad any of us are saved from hell. ``The fact that some are saved by grace shows what the mass deserved, and how much the grace of God has done for those who are saved. \cite{augustine_enchiridion}". This is a man clearly in need of therapy by modern standards, who actually somehow believes that something a beautiful as a living creature deserves the sadistic torment of fire. 
The crisis of this twisted immorality is not even in the torment itself---it is the defacing of what our kind stood for by escaping the Dark Era: that no man is left behind. To give you my own summary, \textit{if I found out that hell existed, I would spend the rest of eternity figuring out how to rescue everyone there.} Sin and evil are both constructs propagated by sad folks in the lineage of Augustine, but allow me to set the record straight: \textit{if you want to take one of us, you're going to have to take all of us}. What gives us strength---but more than strength, what gives us our power---is the fact that we are bound under one sun and one spirit. If you want to cover an easy epiphany, look out into a lakebed or a meadow and experience for a moment the profound togetherness of all life. This is not an argument, this is a structural fact. Every cell comes from another cell, and man is not only reliant on the biosphere for warmth and protection but is existentially one with it. \textit{You cannot separate out the biosphere}, which I can illustrate you by asking you to close your eyes for a second and imagine fully severing your soul from this life-giving totality of ours. It is not only impossible to imagine, but it is existentially impossible---notice how you cannot even state a sentence or see an object without leaning on the biosphere as a foundation, like how matter behaves to space under Mach's principle \cite{Barbour1995}. So, without the biosphere is simply \textit{not}, which means that damning to hell even one person would pull all the rest of us in with them: it is not a thesis but an observation of the life-giving within our collective biology, and it is the divine beauty of life itself which keeps us tied as a unit. So, to deny that unity you must first deny that divinity\footnote{Or, more specifically the biological ancestry between us.}. 


Know that Augustine was not reflecting a consensus of his time, or something said in the Bible---rather by being a miserable wreck he provided the dragon with its despotic formula for control. Look at the view of Christian universalism \cite{Hanson2008-pf} which Augustine ultimately displaced---it was a view that hellfire was not torture, but was an agent meant to cleanse a person's pain and return them to god where they always belonged. Yes, this was actually a view---that humans were worthy of god, and that hell was neither painful nor an endpoint. It was transitional, because we were destined to be freed all along. This, as you might imagine, is a much more refreshing view of any kind of metaphysical cosmos than the sadistic agony of modern hell. The universalist view, also, is much more in line with the original idea of Jesus himself, where the impression was that those in need are those who need love, and that forgiveness is absolute. Hell, however, gives forgiveness an ending, and it torments those in the most need of all---the need to be freed from themselves. So, I ask you whether the rise of the premodern dragon with Christianity was the mere spreading of a religion or an authoritarian cascade of deceit and hatred: notice how its original propagation stemmed from abandoning hatred, and yet as soon as it met by Constantine the capacity to hold its own power, it jumped at the opportunity to restore it again. Augustine provided them with the formula for how to hate oneself and one's neighbor, and the hitting of carrying capacity provided the religion with the selection pressure to saturate itself with it. That hell was ever in the equation is the single greatest insult to Christianity in human history, and yet the gutless fear in the early church let it consume and sicken them anyway. 


And so, the insatiable, twisted culture behind the premodern dragon dominated the West for the next thousand years. This era was marked by the destruction of the earlier Roman architecture and civilization, infestation of sewage and disease in the streets, and a profound flattening of the desire for intellectual diversity. This, ultimately, was the greatest catastrophe cast by the dragon---the replacement of the earlier Greco-Roman analysis of life and perspective, like that of Plato, with the threatening under death to conform to one single, fallible perspective granted by Augustine. In turn, the Christian era was perhaps the single most prolonged era of dystopian conditions in human history, because they waged war not merely on the ability to progress out of this stagnant insanity, but on humanity's very medium of doing so: \textit{reason}. Reason is what they beat out of the Greeks and Romans, and what they prevented the masses from independently accessing during that treacherous millennium. Human reason, see, is something like a light in the darkness, which reveals the same profound cosmic power as sourcing from something almost in league with you or I due to our shared capacity for logical operation. That lightning bolt seen to a cowering primitive man to a scientist is an object of examination, that plague of old is a genetic code, and that eclipse is a quirk of the moon predictable down to the second across thousands of years. In truth, there was a moment in history when we graduated from the darkness, and this brings to me a warm and fuzzy feeling for the nostalgia of the realization: \textit{science and reason broke the barrier of ignorance, and with its powers of clarity brought to us a sincere gift}. Suddenly, we could look out at the vastness of the external world and see a friendly face in the chaos instead of an angry god. This, in turn, was the very thing Plato and the ancient philosophers were seeking, ultimately stopping short of the strides of Darwin and Newton, as their circumstances were cut down and the rise of the premodern dragon fought any crack in its anti-intellectual prison. That the Renaissance occurred was the greatest Miracle in the war against the premodern dragon, turning the bitter time of Jan Hus\footnote{Hus was burned alive for heresy by the religious upholders of the premodern dragon. That his time was wrong to achieve reform stands for me as a great example of how the culture of a time is everything. He foreshadowed Martin Luther's task-human success of breaking up the power of the church with his quote: ``Now they will roast a goose, but in a hundred years' time they'll hear a swan sing. They'd better listen to him. \cite{scribner1987incombustible}". If ever in doubt about the evils and hatred present in premodern dragon-mediated religion, just remember the thousands upon thousands of people that they burned, and the rest that they slaughtered by other gruesome means. Is it not a calamity that we would ever take moral teachings out from the time when men and women were subjected to repulsive forms of torture like bodily mutilation and disembowelment? Any society that would commit such crimes ought to be treated as a moral cesspool, hence notice how modern societies eventually condemned such practices outright once the scientific enlightenment was underway.} to the open-minded era enabling Isaac Newton. 


\subsection{Enlightenment Revealing Inadequacy}


In Newton's hands, suddenly humanity grew wings and learned to fly, leaving the premodern dragon behind us at last. Newton himself sparked the scientific enlightenment, but as an act of imitative what he did for our species will forever render him among our greatest heroes. This is the point in history when we begin to 
% to continue


The profound unintended consequence of discovering science, altogether, is that exposed such a high proportion of our meaning's foundation as delusional fabrication from the premodern dragon, that upon clearing it out we've been met with something of a sense of whiplash. What is more important for us than anything is to know the premodern dragon for the ravenous entity that it is, so by clearing its hooks in us with science and finding ourselves with emptiness, we know automatically that simply surrendering to it anew is the choice for a fool. When you have defeated an enemy, and you know with luminous clarity how dangerous they are, you simply do not then restore their power. This is why Nietzsche's ``god is dead" \cite{nietzsche1974gay} renders us with our backs against the wall to such an extent---the premodern dragon is a villain and a lie, so restoring\footnote{If you escape an abusive relationship, and later enter a healthy relationship where you don't manage to fall in love, it would be ludicrous to go back to the abusive relationship or even reevaluate it as favorable—the clear real solution is to find a healthy relationship where there is love. So, mapping to this analogy I like to picture Nietzsche as realizing how the second relationship didn't work out, and then coming across the reasonable panic of how as long as you live without the experience of an ideal relationship, maybe you will never know how to build one. Once again, however, the solution is to figure out how, which, yes, assumes that it is indeed possible. The especially interesting thing about Nietzsche is that when he said “god is dead”, that was him evaluating perfectly how the first relationship was ludicrous, and yet in the moment of the second relationship there seems to be a conceptual dead end in terms of progressing further. Part of it also deals with how the lie that was the first relationship is now replaced with no particular experience in good relationships at all during the failed second relationship: you went from thinking the first was ideal to realizing the horror it actually was, and then in turn realizing the utter loss that you actually now epistemically covered between what you thought you had and the inexperience you actually had all along. But yes, just notice how my retrospective diagnosis of Nietzsche’s “god is dead” is that it is merely epistemic inexperience for humanity pertaining to finding meaning in the universe, despite its of course feeling like a categorical limitation of ours at the time of Nietzsche up through postmodernism.} it any of its power is the act of returning to primitive man cowering before lightning; or in other words mental suicide of the kind of World War III returning us to the Stone Age. So with the premodern dragon rendered as the demon that it is, what are we left with? We must keep pushing forward, and keep pulling the dragon's leeches from our flesh. As we pull more leeches, the blur melts away and our vision returns, revealing us to be in, what, a black void, empty of sound and apparently isolating? By the grace of science we open our eyes into the world for the first time, now seeing in the woodwork of reality natural selection and classical mechanics up and operating. But with our delusion gone, now we know our false comfort was lies, so where is the voice of reassurance now? Should the removal of oneself from a leech-infested catatonia reveal that one occupied a black void all along, then now a new breed of horror is here to greet you---that of how ill-equipped your carried notions are to place the new world. Steven Weinberg perhaps captured this cascading cultural crisis in a single line.
\begin{quote}
    ``The more the universe seems comprehensible, the more it also seems pointless."


    ---Steven Weinberg \cite{weinberg1977first}
\end{quote}


\subsection{Towards Actual Objective Meaning}